---
name: Find Median From Data Stream
difficulty: Hard
topics: Array, Heaps, Algorithm Design
date: 11/3/2022
---

# Find Median From Data Stream

The median is the middle value in an ordered integer list. If the size of the list is even, there is no middle value, and the median is the mean of the two middle values.

- For example, for arr = [2,3,4], the median is 3.
- For example, for arr = [2,3], the median is (2 + 3) / 2 = 2.5.

Implement the MedianFinder class:

- `MedianFinder()` initializes the MedianFinder object.
- `void addNum(int num)` adds the integer `num` from the data stream to the data structure.
- `double findMedian()` returns the median of all elements so far. Answers within 10^-5 of the actual answer will be accepted.

```txt:example showLineNumbers

Input
["MedianFinder", "addNum", "addNum", "findMedian", "addNum", "findMedian"]
[[], [1], [2], [], [3], []]
Output
[null, null, null, 1.5, null, 2.0]

Explanation
MedianFinder medianFinder = new MedianFinder();
medianFinder.addNum(1);    // arr = [1]
medianFinder.addNum(2);    // arr = [1, 2]
medianFinder.findMedian(); // return 1.5 (i.e., (1 + 2) / 2)
medianFinder.addNum(3);    // arr[1, 2, 3]
medianFinder.findMedian(); // return 2.0

```

## Solution

What is the median? When all numbers are sorted, the middlemost number is the median. If there are an even number of elements, then the middle two elements by 2 is the median.

This question sounds easy: sort the array every time we add an element, and then the middle most is the median.
But if we were to do it that way, the time complexity would be O(n^2logn) which is slow for more enormous inputs.
Another easy way would be looping through the array and finding the right spot to put the new element.
That method would give us a time complexity of O(n^2). Which isn't bad, but we can do better.

In the code below, we will be using heaps, which gives us a time complexity of O(n) average case and O(nlogn) worst case.
How will we use heaps in this solution? Instead of looking at this question like one data frame, imagine we use two arrays.
One array holds the elements' first half, and another contains the second half of the array.
So to get the median if the length is even, you would have to do arr1[-1] + arr2[0] / 2.
Since the last element in the array is the biggest and middle element. The same goes for arr2.
If you understand the idea, I can talk about using heaps here.

From the first half of elements, we only want the biggest element. Use max-heap for the first half and vice versa.
Use min-heap for the second half. To determine if the new element goes into the first half or second half, we can use an if statement.
`if num < maxHeap[0]`, then it's supposed to go into maxHeap (first half), else goes into the minHeap (second half).

- maxHeap: first half
- minHeap: second half

Another problem is that if either of the heaps becomes too large by adding elements, we want to pop elements out in one to get a perfect half again.
After adding a new element, you want to make sure if maxHeap is greater than minHeap by 2, you want to pop it off maxHeap and put it to minHeap.
So you can balance them out. Another statement, if minHeap is greater than maxHeap, then we want to pop the element of minHeap and put it to maxHeap.
Doing this every time after adding a new element guarantees a perfect half.

Time Complexity:

- addNum: avg-O(n), worst-O(nlogn)
- findMedian: O(1)

Space Complexity: O(n)

I'll be using python today since we can't use heaps in javascript

```py:solution showLineNumbers

class MedianFinder:

  def __init__(self):
    # holds the first half elements
    self.maxHeap = []

    # holds the second half elements
    self.minHeap = []

  def addNum(self, num: int) -> None:
    maxHeap = self.maxHeap
    minHeap = self.minHeap

    if len(maxHeap) == 0 or num <= -maxHeap[0]:
      heapq.heappush(maxHeap,-num)
    else:
      heapq.heappush(minHeap, num)

    if len(minHeap) > len(maxHeap):
      heapq.heappush(maxHeap, -heapq.heappop(minHeap))
    elif len(maxHeap) > len(minHeap) + 1:
      heapq.heappush(minHeap, -heapq.heappop(maxHeap))

  def findMedian(self) -> float:
    minHeap = self.minHeap
    maxHeap = self.maxHeap

    if((len(minHeap) + len(maxHeap)) % 2 == 0):
      return (minHeap[0] - maxHeap[0]) / 2
    else:
      return -maxHeap[0]

```
