---
name: Reorganize String
difficulty: Medium
topics: Hash Table, String, Greedy, Sorting, Heap, Counting
date: 08/23/2023
---

# Reorganize String

Given a string s, rearrange the characters of s so that any two adjacent characters are not the same.

Return any possible rearrangement of s or return "" if not possible.

```txt:example showLineNumbers

Example 1:

  Input: s = "aab"
  Output: "aba"

Example 2:
  Input: s = "aaab"
  Output: ""

```

## Solution

The problem could be tricky, but it's straightforward if you look at it differently. I initially thought it would be some dynamic programming; however, it's a detailed greedy problem. In short, the problem only requires us to use the most common repeated char and two chars can't be placed together. If a previous char is a, and the current most repeated char is also a, we will take the second most repeated char to follow the rules of the problem.

We can break the problem into three different steps:

- Make a hashmap with the key as char and the value as the number of occurrences.
- Move the hashmap data into a max heap. The priority is based on the number of occurrences each char is repeated.
- Write a while loop till we use all the chars in the heap.

We will work with Python in this code, as JavaScript lacks the built-in data structure heap. Initially, we want to put the data into a map. To do that, we loop through the characters of the string. If the char already exists in the map, then we add 1 to the value of the key. Otherwise, we put the char in the hashmap as the key and the value as 1. By the end of the loop, we would complete the desired hashmap, where the key is the char, and the value is the number of times the char occurred.

The second step would be moving the hashmap data into the heap. Since we are working with Python, we have a heapq module available directly [documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/heapq.html). The data type we will insert into the heap goes to a tuple, where the first index is the priority (the occurrence of the char), and the second index is the char.

After inserting the data, our final step would be making the string, requiring us to make a while loop. We must make a variable called prev, which would stop us from repeating two same chars next to each other after getting the maximum occured char. We first pop the max occurred char and check if it is the same as the previous char; if not, we add the el to the output str, decrement the occ by one, and store it as prev. We won't put it back in a heap if we reach zero occurrence. If the popped char is the same as the previous char, then we pop another time from the heap. We repeat the same steps: decrease the occurrences, equate prev to the char, and put it back into the heap. We keep doing this till the heap is empty.

> The loop only fails when the most repeated element pops out, which is the same as the previous element. We try to remove the second most repeated element; if it doesn't exist, we return an empty string.

```py:solution.py showLineNumbers

class Solution:
    def reorganizeString(self, s: str) -> str:
      char_count = {}

      for ch in s:
        char_count[ch] = 1 if char_count.get(ch) == None else char_count[ch] + 1

      heap = []

      for key in char_count.keys():
        heappush(heap, (-char_count[key], key))

      prev = ""
      newStr = ""

      while(len(heap)> 0):
        (count, topEl) = heappop(heap)

        if topEl is not prev:
          prev = topEl
          count += 1
          newStr += topEl

          if count is 0:
            continue

          heappush(heap, (count, topEl))
        else:
          if(len(heap) == 0):
            return ""

          (elCount, el) = heappop(heap)
          newStr += el
          elCount += 1
          prev = el

          heappush(heap, (count, topEl))
          if elCount is 0:
            continue

          heappush(heap, (elCount, el))

      return newStr

```
